
## EIP-4844: Proto-Danksharding


Danksharding turns Ethereum into a unified settlement and data availability layer. It was introduced as a part of Ethereum's rollup centric roadmap in 2020. 

---
### Proto-Danksharding
Proto-Danksharding, also known as [EIP-4844(opens in a new tab)](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4844), is a way for [rollups](https://ethereum.org/en/layer-2/#rollups) to add cheaper data to blocks. It is an intermediately step to make txns on L2s cheaper and scale ethereum for > 100,000 tps. 


The name comes from the two researchers who proposed the idea: Protolambda and Dankrad Feist.

The main feature introduced by proto-danksharding is new transaction type, which we call a **blob-carrying transaction**. Before this, rollups had been limited in how cheap they can make user transactions by the fact that they post their transactions in `CALLDATA`.


> [info]
> 
> Blobs are 4096 field-elements of 32 bytes each, with a long term maximum of 16 blobs per block. 4096 * 32 bytes * 16 per block = 2 MiB (One mebibyte equals 1.048576 megabytes) per block maximum. The blob cap per block can start low and grow over multiple network upgrades.


Negatives for CALLDATA:
* Data passed as CALLDATA lives on chain forever even though they are required only for a short period during fraud proof. 

Positive for BlobData:
* Data passed as a blobdata is not accessible to EVM execution and EVM can only view the commitment to the blob.
* At the node-level, the blobs of data are held in the consensus client.
* Blobs are extremely large (~125Kb) and much cheaper than CALLDATA as it is not competing for gas. 
* Data in blobs are temporary and are deleted approximately after 4096 epochs (18days ~ 2eeks)

---
> [!info]
> ##### Why is it OK to delete Blob Data?
> Rollups post commitments to their transaction data on-chain and also make the actual data available in data blobs. This means provers can check the commitments are valid or challenge data they think is wrong. At the node-level, the blobs of data are held in the consensus client. The consensus clients attest that they have seen the data and that it has been propagated around the network. If the data was kept forever, these clients would bloat and lead to large hardware requirements for running nodes. Instead, the data is automatically pruned from the node every 18 days. The consensus client attestations demonstrate that there was a sufficient opportunity for provers to verify the data. The actual data can be stored off-chain by rollup operators, users or others.

---


Before EIP4844 there was another proposed attempt called EIP-4488

